Now, after you go back to Cambridge, then, you stay
there for a while. And what next? Well, I stayed at
Cambridge until I retired. And then every summer,
I came here to La Jolla for two to three months. I was
a professor here and a professor in Cambridge,
which is probably contrary to the regulations of
both universities. And then when I retired from
Cambridge, I moved here. Partly because I
couldn't work in Cambridge, I couldn't get a job,
and partly for tax reasons. What you said just now,
a few thoughts on what you said just before we
started recording. You said that people didn't
always realize that the old fashioned views of
history about the influence of individuals,
still had, in fact, an element of truth in them. The
pendulum had swung a long way in the other
direction under Marxist influence. It was
believed that the economic environment and the
needs of the ruling class were the predominant
thing, almost to the exclusion of the individual.
And the pendulum is now swinging back, and I think
most people would probably agree that Marxist
ideas of the influence of the ruling class on what
actually gets done and the importance of the
economics of the thing are one side of the picture
but of course if you now say how does this thing work
itself out in practice why are things done in one
place and not another then you do have the
influence of the people and this is very important
because it's It's relevant to education. I mean,
what kind of people are you trying to educate? The
idea of education now is to a great extent to push a
lot of information in, test to see it, look through
a hole and test to see it's still there, and then
give people a degree quickly before it spills out.
And I think what you said, and a sense in which there
are certain kinds of people who do in fact get
things done. And this is not necessarily an
entirely intellectual question. It's a question
of character, frame of mind, even of the way you're
brought up. I mean, Rutherford, for instance,
was, as I said last time, I think, looked at himself
as a farmer's boy. In a sense, what one might call a
liberated person. That's to say, he knew what he
wanted. He thought he ought to have it. He had a
conviction that what he was doing was worthwhile
and the right thing. And this is very striking in
Ewing. The certainty that what he wanted to do was
what the Lord would have done. And I think this is
extremely important. The development of a
self-confidence in persons in positions of
leadership. If they just go along doing what they
did for their PhD, you see almost the majority of
scientists do something for their PhD and go on
doing the same thing and don't sort of get out of it
and are continually on the defensive about this
matter still being important. I found a whole
group of people in Yale recently doing what I did
for my PhD on electron scattering. And the subject
didn't seem to change very much. The techniques
were a bit better. But how anyone, a young man,
could go into this, I find it difficult to believe.
Anyway, I'm sure this is mostly my ignorance. The
group is probably doing something useful. But the
idea, when I say liberated, I mean this, that you
see what you want to do, you consider what you need
to do it, not what you think you can get. That if you
have some great scheme for going to Mars, you
shouldn't say to yourself, I can't do this, I
shan't be able to get the money. You should say, now
what does this cost? Have a realistic idea of what
is needed to do it, and then if you really think it's
worthwhile, go and try and find someone who will
make it possible to do it. And I think the thing that
modern education lacks to some extent Is the
developing in people a self-confidence?
It's all concerned not with the old-fashioned
character development, but with the acquisition
of knowledge. I mean, there's so much more
knowledge to acquire now. This is obviously a line
of least resistance. And I've always tried with
graduate students to get them to want to do
something. to come to me and say, what I'd like to do
is this. And I say, well, then, all right, let's do
it. You get out a plan for doing it. How big a ship do
you need? How many people do you need? What do you
need to do? And then find the money. And sometimes
these PhD problems can cost hundreds of thousands
of dollars. And one should try and make young
people believe Not that one is very short of money
and has to be very careful, you know, like many
professors are, but to make them believe there's
lots of money in the world, let's go out and get it. I
think there is an important way in which the
director of a research group can do this sort of
semi-psychological education. It's a kind of
character development, a view of the world, And of
course undergraduates like this too. If you're
lecturing to undergraduates, they love these
stories about blowing up ships. And
unfortunately we broke the ship in the middle of
this kind of thing. The rather cheerful attitude
to life that you can't make omelettes without
breaking eggs. Someone told me the other day that
it was Lenin who first said, you can't make onwards
without breaking eggs. Is this really true? I
don't know. I've never heard that accredited to
him. I don't think it's true, but I found it
somewhere the other day. I think it can't be true.
It's a phrase I've always known. Me too, and it
doesn't sound as something Lenin would say. It
doesn't sound like that, no. He said it apropos
shooting people. Okay, that's right. I mean,
bloody murderer and wanted an excuse for shooting
people. He probably said you can't make forms
unless you kill Kulaks. That would sound more
sense to me.
Well, now, when you retire then from Cambridge,
you come here permanently to work, partially
because you can work here and... I'm on a
year-to-year contract, yeah? And I'm getting
paid six months of the year, and the other six
months I make my living by my wits. And this in
Cambridge, I mean, I could go on, I suppose, doing
my own work in Cambridge, but here I can do some
teaching, have some graduate students, and the
discontinuity on retiring is much less here than
it is in Cambridge. Cambridge is frightened of
making any distinction between people, so they
have a fixed retiring age cut, and it would be quite
foreign to their feelings to... say Mr. A can stay
on for another year and Mr. B can't. On the same
grounds, they pay all professors equally. Okay.
What about the tax structure in England? I don't
want to talk about the tax structure in England. I
will just say this, that my pension from Cambridge
is a lump sum of money, and I have to invest that to
get a pension. After the first thousand pounds,
this is taxed at 50%, and the tax goes up to 98%. And
I'm not going to live in a country that does that to
them. Well, the reason I was asking is we have been
fortunate in this country to be able to attract a
goodly number of people from Britain and England
in particular because the tax structure has been
so... Well, of course, now, just at this moment, of
course, you could attract an indefinite number of
people. But, of course, you can't get them
residence visas. Yeah, right. You can't get them
labor permits. That's right. Actually, you can
usually do it a year at a time. You get them an H1 visa
a year at a time. It's just taken me 16 months to get a
residence visa. You've no idea what the
documentation is like. Everyone's very charming
and nice about it, but clearly the whole process is
so complicated as to constitute an intelligence
case.
Now... You have continued your work on here, then,
oceanography. Now, I have a series of questions,
if you don't mind, I'd like to ask you that are sort
of what-if questions. All right? If you had to name
what you consider your greatest single
scientific contribution, and I realize that's a
terrible question, what would you name? Oh, dear,
oh, dear, oh, dear.
I think I know what other people would say. They
would probably say the heat flow work.
Absolutely. My own feeling is that it is to have
provided the atmosphere and the opportunity for
the group that nailed down continental drift. I
made contributions to it myself, particularly
the taking seriously Wegener's idea of the fits of
the continents in the past. At the same time, I
forgot to mention it, At the same time as the other
work was going on, I was working with two graduate
students on seeing whether North America and
Greenland would fit into Europe and South America
into Africa. And we found the fit was incomparably
better than anyone had expected. Also, I think,
the reason I hesitated was that I was, in fact, the
first person to do seismic shooting at sea with the
instruments not on the bottom, which is a very
necessary discovery. It would have been
discovered almost at once by other people, but I
was in fact the first to do it, because it's very
difficult to put instruments on the bottom of the
deep sea, and rather easy to put them near the
surface. Well, I mean, it's an unanswerable
question, it doesn't make much sense really, but
I'd have thought the building up of this group in
Cambridge that made this great contribution to
the modern ideas.
Teaching at Scripps, how do you find American
students? Well, I have great fun teaching at
Scripps. I enjoy it enormously. I teach a first
year course on the earth to non-scientists. So
we've got all kinds of people. As a matter of fact,
I've noticed as the years go by that we get a larger
and larger proportion of scientists in it. They
sort of creep in out of the woodwork. It's
directed, in principle, at non-scientists who
want to do one course in science. And these
students I find absolutely charming, most
delightful people, extremely appreciative,
very nice to me personally, always come and talk to
me afterwards. very restrained in expressing
their troubles if they don't get good grades and so
on. Really very nice people. Their main trouble is
they can't write at all. I mean, they're hardly
literate, which is very surprising for arts
people. I talked about this last time. I would say
the outstanding defect of American education at
the moment is not to teach writing. People can
read, but they can't write. They aren't, of
course, very good at speaking either. The
standard of public speaking in America is not
high, with a few well-known exceptions. But on the
whole, if you put a student on to make an
after-dinner speech or something, it's pretty
lamentable. Well, the other side I know is the
graduate students, of course. The graduate
students are extremely well-informed, I think
much better informed, than our English students.
They know more. Partly because they have to do
courses as graduate students. You see, we have a
three-year undergraduate course, so the
transition from school to a graduate student is
three years. And when they become graduate
students, there are courses they can go to, but
they don't go to them, and they don't have to go to
them, and they don't have any exam. What they have
to do is do a piece of original work, write a thesis
on it, and pass an oral exam on the thesis and on the
general subject in which it falls. And I described
my own oral exam last time. The idea of the general
subject in which it falls is fairly wide. But they
don't have any more examinations on courses. So
that I think your students, when they've got their
PhDs, know more than us do. I think This amount of
formal teaching is a little inhibiting of the sort
of freedom I was talking about. The sort of
optimism and belief that you can do anything,
which I learned partly from Rutherford and partly
from the war. I mean, the war is a thing which had an
enormous and I think almost entirely favorable
influence on scientists, and which the present
generation has missed, of course. I mean a whole
generation. It was a thing in which it gave you
confidence because what you were doing was
regarded as important and not as an eccentric
hobby. And I think part of this drift towards
applied and relevant projects is an effort to find
a way of working which will be acceptable to the
society, in which you will be regarded as a
valuable and useful member of society. And I think
this is a good thing. I think the ivory tower,
things like particle physics, if I were a young man
I wouldn't go into particle physics. Dreadful
subject. Very high prestige in scientific
circles, but not outside.
There's a very, many scientists who have a very
restricted idea of what is interesting, of
course. I mean, questions like the safety of
nuclear power stations, disposal of nuclear
waste. A serious interest in these matters is
almost not science.
Do you believe then, is it fair to say, that a good
oceanographer is also a generalist in science?
Oh, you've got to be a generalist. You asked me
yesterday whether I thought people were more
specialized, and I said no, I thought they had to be
much less specialized, because the subjects are
much less clearly demarcated. I mean, if we take
oceanography, for example, This whole subject,
which I've spent my life developing largely, of
the study of the bottom of the ocean, marine
geology, this has connections in all directions.
It's obviously got connections with geology.
It's got connections with the traditional
oceanography. I mean, the sense of sedimentation
and all the techniques of dealing with things
covered by several miles of water. And it's got
connections with physics. Now we've got global
theories. We have to develop mechanisms. What is
it that moves the continents? All these kinds of
things. So you're connected with everything from
the most difficult theoretical physics to
orthodox geology. And the things have become
unstuck. That when I was young, geology was a
complete thing with a ring around it. You could say
what was geology. It was in practice defined as
something we did with a hammer and a microscope.
and now it's become connected with everything
else. Okay, now what I wanted to do was use that as a
lead-in question. I note that in your, well, in
what has been written about you, you list yourself
as, in effect, belonging to no political party. I
just don't say anything about it. Okay, that's
fine. I wondered if you thought, as a scientist who
is a generalist, that you ought to express
opinions on things like nuclear waste. I'm
extremely interested in politics, in fact. But no
one who's looking for an American visa is going to
say what their politics are, whatever they are. My
politics are, in fact, to the right of center
Republican in American terms, right-wing
conservative in English terms. I was, for a long
while, very willing to put up with Nixon on the
grounds that I preferred a knave to a fool. He
seemed to me, he turned out eventually to be both a
knave and a fool. But for a while, I thought he was
just a knave, which seemed to me relatively
harmless. But anyway, I would say, if Ford can be
said to have a position, I thought that was about
fine. But of course, he is rather extremely
non-intellectual. I'm certainly to the right of
Rockefeller and certainly to the left of
Bellwater, this sort of position. Well, now, I've
taken great interest in a tremendous amount of
time and trouble over questions connected with
disarmament. I've been a British delegate at
Geneva. I was a member of the experts conference in
58 at Geneva. I've been a member of the Pogwash
affair for many, many years.
all kinds of committees connected with
disarmament agreements with the Russians. I've
also been closely connected with defense. I think
I mentioned last time, I was chairman of the
Anglo-American Ballistic Missiles Committee,
which was for a while a body of some significance.
And so I have spent quite a lot of time on this. I'm
not, however, a joiner. I generally don't sign
things. You know, there are always protests about
someone having shot someone in Uganda, or someone
having failed to let a Jew out of Russia, or those
endless protest things. And if you once start
signing these, you get yourself typed in the
public mind, and if you aren't extremely careful,
you'll find you've in effect joined some
crypto-communist movement. A lot of these things
are simply concealed lawsuits of the Communist
Party. And so I've systematically refused to sign
any of these appeals that are published in the
newspapers and so on. But I have belonged to
official bodies for many years. I was a member of
the Foreign Office Committee on Disarmament and
all these. I was a member of the Institute of
Strategic Studies for a good many years, so I got
bored with it. I'm not, in the ordinary sense,
politically active, but I've I'm really an , you
might say. That's to say, if I'd taken a little more
trouble about it and been a little more
interested, I would probably have been like Jerry
Wiesner or Solly Zuckerman and been advisor to
some president or prime minister or something and
sort of sat in a back room and been generally
regarded as a nefarious influence. But I never had
the time, really, to devote to that. I have spent a
lot of time talking to politicians and advising
them. Now, I had wanted to ask you some things about
your international commitments. Really, I want
to ask you three things about them. First of all,
are you optimistic in terms of future development
of the seas about international cooperation in
oceanography? Oh, dear. Of course, you've got two
conflicting tendencies. On the whole, the
developed countries are interested in
collaborating in a tremendous task, which is
clearly a global task, and can't be done locally.
And so far as the Japanese, the Americans, the
Canadians, Western Europe, British, there is no
problem. And the Russians, there is no problem.
The troubles come from the undeveloped countries
who for easily understandable reasons regard
anything which is done by the developed countries
as being an attempt to steal something from them
and therefore their tendency is to get control of
as much as possible and keep the developed
countries out till such a time as they've
developed their own understanding and
technology and this is the back
of the Conference on the Law of the Sea. It's been
promoted by the undeveloped countries very
largely. The Americans, the British, and the
Russians would much rather the whole thing didn't
happen, because we're doing quite well as it is.
But all these other countries are trying to
produce restrictive arrangements, and I think
it's difficult to judge how it comes out. I find it
difficult to believe that the developed
countries will give in
If necessary, they won't sign the treaty. You see,
if you had to get permission from the nearest
country every time you operated at sea, it would be
impossible to operate. I mean, you'd have to say
exactly what you were going to do months and months
and months beforehand. You'd often get refused at
the last minute if you just kill oceanography as a
science. And it may happen that the governments of
the United States and Western Europe decide to
throw the scientists to the wolves in return for
some other concession. But I don't think they
will. I've spent a lot of time talking to the
Foreign Office people about this. and I know
something about the corresponding negotiations
in this country and Canada. Canada has behaved
very badly and is tending to join the undeveloped
countries over this for reasons that are very
difficult to tell. I've had endless
correspondence with the Canadians about this,
and I just do not know why they're being so foolish.
Now, that really, in fact, answers my second
question, which had to do with the 200-mile limit.
What sort of effect did you think that would have on
the country? Well, it depends, you see, what you
mean by the limit. I think it is inevitable that we
are going to have a 200 mile limit. I don't see that
there's any way out of this. I think the conference
won't agree, and we'll have unilateral
declarations of 200 mile limits. And I don't see as
much anyone can do about it. We've got to live with
it. This largely closes work on the continental
shelves. And I can understand the desire of, well,
of course, so far as mineral resources is
concerned, is not very different from the 58
Treaty, the Treaty on the Continental Shelf. In
any case, the nearest land has control of the
exploitation of mineral resources. Well,
they're clearly also going to take fishing rights
after those distances, I think, and I fear they're
going to take a thing which is no justification at
all in international law, That is control of
scientific investigations within these units.
This, at the moment, on the continental shelf in
Western Europe, whatever the international law
may be, we have an arrangement by which the
countries on both sides of the Peace of Sea Concern
give notice. And this works quite well. They just
give notice, the Foreign Office circulates the
plans, and anyone who wishes to object can object.
The thing looked like becoming a nuisance at one
time. They were circulating them and requiring
you to say you didn't object. I persuaded them that
they only needed a reply who did object. And this
ensures practically that no one ever does. And
this is working very well. But I think it's going to
be impossible to do work of any sort within 200
miles of any undeveloped country. Well, we may
just have to put up with this. And I think in some
cases, such as Argentina, one can reach
agreements with them, bilateral agreements for
doing things. In the case of Chile, at the moment
you could. Three or four years ago you couldn't.
They'll ask for, in the African case, they'll ask
for concessions, money, something of the kind.
But, of course, it still leaves most of the deep sea
free for investigation. What I'm terrified of is
an agreement about investigation in the deep sea.
What sort of an agreement? Well, an agreement, I
imagine it would be an agreement by which one,
there was an international body run by the UN from
whom we had to get permission, which I think would
be intolerable. Well, now then, the third of these
questions in this series, if I may. Do you foresee,
in effect, more cooperation between industrial
countries in broad-scale oceanographic
ventures or less? Well, I think so far as the
government and academic community is concerned,
I should have thought the collaboration is
already very extensive and will continue.
French project with a considerable British input
as well. And almost all oceanographic
expeditions are to some extent international. I
mean here in Scripps they borrowed a Canadian ship
recently and there are all kinds of very free and
easy interchange and the deep sea drilling
project is now an international project. That was
partly, of course, to ease the effects of
restrictions. It's easier to get permission for
an international project over an area claimed by
some other state than it is for a national project.
So I'd have thought that, partly because things
are expensive, partly because it is in its nature
international, that the very satisfactory
international collaboration would go on. If you
start to develop
commercial things on the ocean floor, then of
course there are rather different
considerations. If it's very expensive, then
they may be glad of collaboration from firms in
various parts of the world. If you feel you can
finance it yourself, you'll obviously do it
yourself. The military things would only be
collaboration between allies. I mean, I think
it's unlikely we'll collaborate with the
Russians over military things. So it is one of my
views that we should encourage um relations of a
technical kind connected with military affairs
with the russians because the most dangerous
thing is misapprehensions and if you wish for
example to have means of detection of the motion of
ships over the ocean then there's something to be
said for having a joint a joint arrangement with
the russians so you both have the same information
you can always add your own domestic system as well
if you want to but i i'm not sure that the absolute
separation of the two opposing sides in their
technical measures is sensible